Monkeypox

Monkeypox is a rare disease caused by monkeypox virus infection which is a member of the Orthopoxvirus genus in the Poxviridae family. Variola virus (which causes smallpox), vaccinia virus (used in smallpox vaccine), and cowpox virus are all members of the Orthopoxvirus genus.

Monkeypox was discovered in 1958 when two outbreaks of a pox-like disease occurred in colonies of monkeys kept for research, hence the name “monkeypox.” The first human case of monkeypox was recorded in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

Since then, monkeypox has been documented in humans in Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Liberia, Nigeria, Republic of the Congo, and Sierra Leone. Infections are most common in the Democratic Republic of Congo.


Symptoms & Signs

Monkeypox has an incubation period of 7-14 days, but it can range from 5-21 days. A rash appears 1 to 3 days (sometimes longer) after the appearance of fever, often starting on the face and spreading to other parts of the body.

Before falling off, lesions go through the following stages:

● Macules→Papules→Vesicles→Pustules→Scabs
The disease lasts about 24 weeks on average. Every 1 in 10 persons in Africa that has been in contact with the disease has died so far due to the infection.


Mode of Transmission
1. The person can be infected when he/she comes into contact with the monkeypox virus from an infected animal, an infected person, or contaminated items.
2. The virus can potentially pass from the mother to her fetus through the placenta.
3. The monkeypox virus can be transmitted from animals to humans by biting or scratching an infected animal
4. The virus can also spread through direct contact with an infected person’s body fluids or sores
5. Monkeypox is spread mostly through direct contact with infectious sores, scabs, or bodily fluids.
6. Monkeypox spreads by close contact between people, such as during intercourse, as well as activities such as kissing, snuggling, and touching portions of the body with monkeypox lesions.

Pathosiology

The monkeypox virus replicates at the inoculation site after entering via any route (oropharynx, nasopharynx, or intradermal). It subsequently travels to local lymph nodes. Following then, viral propagation and seeding of other organs occurs as a result of an initial viremia. This is the incubation period, which can last anywhere from 7 to 14 days with a maximum of 21 days.

Symptom onset is linked to secondary viremia, which causes prodromal symptoms including fever and lymphadenopathy for 1 to 2 days before lesions emerge. At this time, infected patients may be contagious. Lesions begin in the oropharynx and progress to the skin. By the time lesions emerge, serum antibodies are frequently detected.

Preventive Measures

1. Avoid coming into contact with animals infected with the virus and also stay away from touching objects that have come into contact with a sick animal, such as bedding
2. Isolate diseased patients from other people who could become infected
3. Wash your hands with soap and water or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer to maintain healthy hand hygiene
4. When caring for patients, wear personal protective equipment (PPE)

Prognosis

The monkeypox virus is divided into two groups. With a case fatality rate of less than 1%, the West African clade has a better outlook. The Central Basin clade (Central African clade), on the other hand, is more dangerous, with a case fatality rate of up to 11% in unvaccinated youngsters. Aside from possible scarring and skin discoloration, the majority of patients recover completely within four weeks of symptom onset .

Treatment

Monkeypox illness does not have a specific therapy at this time, however outbreaks can be managed. A monkeypox outbreak can be controlled with the use of smallpox vaccination, cidofovir, ST-246, and vaccinia immune globulin (VIG)

Complications

1. Superinfection of the skin with bacteria
2. Scarring on the skin that is permanent
3. Pigmentation (hyperpigmentation) or hypopigmentation (hypopigmentation)
4. corneal scarring that is permanent (vision loss)
5. Pneumonia
6. Dehydration is a common ailment (vomiting, diarrhea, decreased oral intake due to painful oral lesions, and insensible fluid loss from widespread skin disruption)
7. Sepsis
8. Encephalitis
9. It may also cause death

Patient Education

Education of patients and healthcare workers in regions where the monkeypox virus is endemic is of the utmost importance. Local containment is the best defense against the worldwide spread. Historically,
the monkeypox virus has a limited ability to spread between humans.

Nonetheless, the waning population of people vaccinated against smallpox paves the way for an increased prevalence of human monkeypox, increasing viral mutation opportunities. Therefore, improving patient recognition of this disease, reporting fidelity, and access to diagnostic capabilities are critical actions for collecting the data necessary to gain a deeper understanding of and strengthen defense against monkeypox.
